 The 24-cell is one of only three self-dual regular Euclidean polytopes which are neither a polygon nor a simplex. The other two are also 4-polytopes, but not convex: the grand stellated 120-cell and the great 120-cell. The 24-cell is nearly unique among self-dual regular convex polytopes in that it and the even polygons are the only such polytopes where a face is not opposite an edge.
 The long radius (center to vertex) of the 24-cell is equal to its edge length; thus its long diameter (vertex to opposite vertex) is 2 edge lengths. Only a few uniform polytopes have this property, including the four-dimensional 24-cell and tesseract, the three-dimensional cuboctahedron, and the two-dimensional hexagon. (The cuboctahedron is the equatorial cross section of the 24-cell, and the hexagon is the equatorial cross section of the cuboctahedron.) Radially equilateral polytopes are those which can be constructed, with their long radii, from equilateral triangles which meet at the center of the polytope, each contributing two radii and an edge.
 The convex regular polytopes in the first four dimensions with a 5 in their Schlӓfli symbol are the pentagon {5}, the icosahedron {3, 5}, the dodecahedron {5, 3}, the 600-cell {3,3,5} and the 120-cell {5,3,3}. The 5-cell {3, 3, 3} is also pentagonal in the sense that its Petrie polygon is the pentagon.
 The convex regular 4-polytopes can be ordered by size as a measure of 4-dimensional content (hypervolume) for the same radius. This is their proper order of enumeration, the order in which they nest inside each other as compounds.[7] Each greater polytope in the sequence is rounder than its predecessor, enclosing more content[8] within the same radius. The 4-simplex (5-cell) is the limit smallest case, and the 120-cell is the largest. Complexity (as measured by comparing configuration matrices or simply the number of vertices) follows the same ordering. This provides an alternative numerical naming scheme for regular polytopes in which the 24-cell is the 24-point 4-polytope: fourth in the ascending sequence that runs from 5-point 4-polytope to 600-point 4-polytope.
 The edge length will always be different unless predecessor and successor are both radially equilateral, i.e. their edge length is the same as their radius (so both are preserved). Since radially equilateral polytopes[b] are rare, it seems that the only such construction (in any dimension) is from the 8-cell to the 24-cell, making the 24-cell the unique regular polytope (in any dimension) which has the same edge length as its predecessor of the same radius.
 The edges of six of the squares are aligned with the grid lines of the √2 radius coordinate system. For example: is the square in the xy plane. The edges of the squares are not 24-cell edges, they are interior chords joining two vertices 90o distant from each other; so the squares are merely invisible configurations of four of the 24-cell's vertices, not visible 24-cell features.
 Up to 6 planes can be mutually orthogonal in 4 dimensions. 3 dimensional space accommodates only 3 perpendicular axes and 3 perpendicular planes through a single point. In 4 dimensional space we may have 4 perpendicular axes and 6 perpendicular planes through a point (for the same reason that the tetrahedron has 6 edges, not 4): there are 6 ways to take 4 dimensions 2 at a time. Three such perpendicular planes (pairs of axes) meet at each vertex of the 24-cell (for the same reason that three edges meet at each vertex of the tetrahedron). Each of the 6 planes is completely orthogonal to just one of the other planes: the only one with which it does not share a line (for the same reason that each edge of the tetrahedron is orthogonal to just one of the other edges: the only one with which it does not share a point). Two completely orthogonal planes are perpendicular and opposite each other, as two edges of the tetrahedron are perpendicular and opposite.
 To visualize how two planes can intersect in a single point in a four dimensional space, consider the Euclidean space (w, x, y, z) and imagine that the w dimension represents time rather than a spatial dimension. The xy central plane (where w=0, z=0) shares no axis with the wz central plane (where x=0, y=0). The xy plane exists at only a single instant in time (w=0); the wz plane (and in particular the w axis) exists all the time. Thus their only moment and place of intersection is at the origin point (0,0,0,0).
 Two planes in 4-dimensional space can have four possible reciprocal positions: (1) they can coincide (be exactly the same plane); (2) they can be parallel (the only way they can fail to intersect at all); (3) they can intersect in a single line, as two non-parallel planes do in 3-dimensional space; or (4) they can intersect in a single point[h] if they are completely orthogonal.
There are 3 sets of 6 disjoint great squares in the 24-cell (of a total of [18] distinct great squares),[fb] designated. Each named set[fc] of 6 Clifford parallel[ad] squares comprises a discrete fibration covering all 24 vertices.
 In four-dimensional Euclidean geometry, a quaternion is simply a (w, x, y, z) Cartesian coordinate. Hamilton did not see them as such when he discovered the quaternions. Schläfli would be the first to consider four-dimensional Euclidean space, publishing his discovery of the regular polyschemes in 1852, but Hamilton would never be influenced by that work, which remained obscure into the 20th century. Hamilton found the quaternions when he realized that a fourth dimension, in some sense, would be necessary in order to model rotations in three-dimensional space.[37] Although he described a quaternion as an ordered four-element multiple of real numbers, the quaternions were for him an extension of the complex numbers, not a Euclidean space of four dimensions.
 The edges of the orthogonal great squares are not aligned with the grid lines of the unit radius coordinate system. Six of the squares do lie in the 6 orthogonal planes of this coordinate system, but their edges are the √2 diagonals of unit edge length squares of the coordinate lattice. For example: is the square in the xy plane. Notice that the 8 integer coordinates comprise the vertices of the 6 orthogonal squares.
 In an isoclinic rotation, each point anywhere in the 4-polytope moves an equal distance in four orthogonal directions at once, on a 4-dimensional diagonal. The point is displaced a total Pythagorean distance equal to the square root of four times the square of that distance. All vertices are displaced to a vertex at least two edge lengths away.[s] For example, when the unit-radius 24-cell rotates isoclinically 60° in a hexagon invariant plane and 60° in its completely orthogonal invariant plane,[ax] each vertex is displaced to another vertex √3 (120°) away, moving √3/4 ≈ 0.866 (half the √3 chord length) in four orthogonal directions.[cf]
 Each great hexagon of the 24-cell contains one axis (one pair of antipodal vertices) belonging to each of the three inscribed 16-cells. The 24-cell contains three disjoint inscribed 16-cells, rotated 60° isoclinically[m] with respect to each other (so their corresponding vertices are 120° = √3 apart). A 16-cell is an orthonormal basis for a 4-dimensional coordinate system, because its 8 vertices define the four orthogonal axes. In any choice of a vertex-up coordinate system (such as the unit radius coordinates used in this article), one of the three inscribed 16-cells is the basis for the coordinate system, and each hexagon has only one axis which is a coordinate system axis.
 The hexagons are inclined (tilted) at 60 degrees with respect to the unit radius coordinate system's orthogonal planes. Each hexagonal plane contains only one of the 4 coordinate system axes.[n] The hexagon consists of 3 pairs of opposite vertices (three 24-cell diameters): one opposite pair of integer coordinate vertices (one of the four coordinate axes), and two opposite pairs of half-integer coordinate vertices (not coordinate axes). For example: is a hexagon on the y axis. Unlike the √2 squares, the hexagons are actually made of 24-cell edges, so they are visible features of the 24-cell.
 Eight √1 edges converge in curved 3-dimensional space from the corners of the 24-cell's cubical vertex figure[ag] and meet at its center (the vertex), where they form 4 straight lines which cross there. The 8 vertices of the cube are the eight nearest other vertices of the 24-cell. The straight lines are geodesics: two √1-length segments of an apparently straight line (in the 3-space of the 24-cell's curved surface) that is bent in the 4th dimension into a great circle hexagon (in 4-space). Imagined from inside this curved 3-space, the bends in the hexagons are invisible. From outside (if we could view the 24-cell in 4-space), the straight lines would be seen to bend in the 4th dimension at the cube centers, because the center is displaced outward in the 4th dimension, out of the hyperplane defined by the cube's vertices. Thus the vertex cube is actually a cubic pyramid. Unlike a cube, it seems to be radially equilateral (like the tesseract and the 24-cell itself): its "radius" equals its edge length.[ah]
 It is not difficult to visualize four hexagonal planes intersecting at 60 degrees to each other, even in three dimensions. Four hexagonal central planes intersect at 60 degrees in the cuboctahedron. Four of the 24-cell's 16 hexagonal central planes (lying in the same 3-dimensional hyperplane) intersect at each of the 24-cell's vertices exactly the way they do at the center of a cuboctahedron. But the edges around the vertex do not meet as the radii do at the center of a cuboctahedron; the 24-cell has 8 edges around each vertex, not 12, so its vertex figure is the cube, not the cuboctahedron. The 8 edges meet exactly the way 8 edges do at the apex of a canonical cubic pyramid.[p]
 In an isoclinic rotation vertices move diagonally, like the bishops in chess. Vertices in an isoclinic rotation cannot reach their orthogonally nearest neighbor vertices[z] by double-rotating directly toward them (and also orthogonally to that direction), because that double rotation takes them diagonally between their nearest vertices, missing them, to a vertex farther away in a larger-radius surrounding shell of vertices,[ab] the way bishops are confined to the white or black squares of the chessboard and cannot reach squares of the opposite color, even those immediately adjacent.[cm] Things moving diagonally move farther than 1 unit of distance in each movement step (√2 on the chessboard, √3 in the 24-cell), but at the cost of missing half the destinations.[bz] However, in an isoclinic rotation of a rigid body all the vertices rotate at once, so every destination will be reached by some vertex. Moreover, there is another isoclinic rotation in hexagon invariant planes which does take each vertex to an adjacent (nearest) vertex. A 24-cell can displace each vertex to a vertex 60° away (a nearest vertex) by rotating isoclinically by 30° in two completely orthogonal invariant planes (one of them a hexagon), not by double-rotating directly toward the nearest vertex (and also orthogonally to that direction), but instead by double-rotating directly toward a more distant vertex (and also orthogonally to that direction). This helical 30° isoclinic rotation takes the vertex 60° to its nearest-neighbor vertex by a different path than a simple 60° rotation would. The path along the helical isocline and the path along the simple great circle have the same 60° arc-length, but they consist of disjoint sets of points (except for their endpoints, the two vertices). They are both geodesic (shortest) arcs, but on two alternate kinds of geodesic circle. One is doubly curved (through all four dimensions), and one is simply curved (lying in a two-dimensional plane).
 The 24-cell contains 3 distinct 8-cells (tesseracts), rotated 60° isoclinically with respect to each other. The corresponding vertices of two 8-cells are √3 (120°) apart. Each 8-cell contains 8 cubical cells, and each cube contains four √3 chords (its long diameters). The 8-cells are not completely disjoint (they share vertices),[w] but each √3 chord occurs as a cube long diameter in just one 8-cell. The √3 chords joining the corresponding vertices of two 8-cells belong to the third 8-cell as cube diameters.[ab]
 These triangles' edges of length √3 are the diagonals[s] of cubical cells of unit edge length found within the 24-cell, but those cubical (tesseract)[t] cells are not cells of the unit radius coordinate lattice.
 These triangles lie in the same planes containing the hexagons;[o] two triangles of edge length √3 are inscribed in each hexagon. For example, in unit radius coordinates: are two opposing central triangles on the y axis, with each triangle formed by the vertices in alternating rows. Unlike the hexagons, the √3 triangles are not made of actual 24-cell edges, so they are invisible features of the 24-cell, like the √2 squares.
 Polytopes are completely disjoint if all their element sets are disjoint: they do not share any vertices, edges, faces or cells. They may still overlap in space, sharing 4-content, volume, area, or lineage.
 In 4 dimensional space we can construct 4 perpendicular axes and 6 perpendicular planes through a point. Without loss of generality, we may take these to be the axes and orthogonal central planes of a (w, x, y, z) Cartesian coordinate system. In 4 dimensions we have the same 3 orthogonal planes (xy, xz, yz) that we have in 3 dimensions, and also 3 others (wx, wy, wz). Each of the 6 orthogonal planes shares an axis with 4 of the others, and is completely orthogonal to just one of the others: the only one with which it does not share an axis. Thus there are 3 pairs of completely orthogonal planes: xy and wz intersect only at the origin; xz and wy intersect only at the origin; yz and wx intersect only at the origin.
 The 18 great squares of the 24-cell occur as three sets of 6 orthogonal great squares,[x] each forming a 16-cell. The three 16-cells are completely disjoint (and Clifford parallel): each has its own 8 vertices (on 4 orthogonal axes) and its own 24 edges (of length √2). The 18 square great circles are crossed by 16 hexagonal great circles; each hexagon has one axis (2 vertices) in each 16-cell.[o] The two great triangles inscribed in each great hexagon (occupying its alternate vertices, and with edges that are its √3 chords) have one vertex in each 16-cell. Thus each great triangle is a ring linking the three completely disjoint 16-cells. There are four different ways (four different fibrations of the 24-cell) in which the 8 vertices of the 16-cells correspond by being triangles of vertices √3 apart: there are 32 distinct linking triangles. Each pair of 16-cells forms a tesseract (8-cell). Each great triangle has one √3 edge in each tesseract, so it is also a ring linking the three tesseracts.
 The 8 nearest neighbor vertices surround the vertex (in the curved 3-dimensional space of the 24-cell's boundary surface) the way a cube's 8 corners surround its center. (The vertex figure of the 24-cell is a cube.)
 The 6 second-nearest neighbor vertices surround the vertex in curved 3-dimensional space the way an octahedron's 6 corners surround its center.
 Eight √3 chords converge from the corners of the 24-cell's cubical vertex figure[ag] and meet at its center (the vertex), where they form 4 straight lines which cross there. Each of the eight √3 chords runs from this cube's center to the center of a diagonally adjacent (vertex-bonded) cube,[s] which is another vertex of the 24-cell: one located 120° away in a third concentric shell of eight √3-distant vertices surrounding the second shell of six √2-distant vertices that surrounds the first shell of eight √1-distant vertices.
 Thus (√1, √2, √3, √4) are the vertex chord lengths of the tesseract as well as of the 24-cell. They are also the diameters of the tesseract (from short to long), though not of the 24-cell.
Two Clifford parallel great circles on the 3-sphere spanned by a twisted annulus. They have a common center point in 4-dimensional Euclidean space, and could lie in completely orthogonal rotation planes.
Clifford parallels are non-intersecting curved lines that are parallel in the sense that the perpendicular (shortest) distance between them is the same at each point.[15] A double helix is an example of Clifford parallelism in ordinary 3-dimensional Euclidean space. In 4-space Clifford parallels occur as geodesic great circles on the 3-sphere.[16] Whereas in 3-dimensional space, any two geodesic great circles on the 2-sphere will always intersect at two antipodal points, in 4-dimensional space not all great circles intersect; various sets of Clifford parallel non-intersecting geodesic great circles can be found on the 3-sphere. Perhaps the simplest example is that six mutually orthogonal great circles can be drawn on the 3-sphere, as three pairs of completely orthogonal great circles.[x] Each completely orthogonal pair is Clifford parallel. The two circles cannot intersect at all, because they lie in planes which intersect at only one point: the center of the 3-sphere.[am] Because they are perpendicular and share a common center,[an] the two circles are obviously not parallel and separate in the usual way of parallel circles in 3 dimensions; rather they are connected like adjacent links in a chain, each passing through the other without intersecting at any points, forming a Hopf link.
 A geodesic great circle lies in a 2-dimensional plane which passes through the center of the polytope. Notice that in 4 dimensions this central plane does not bisect the polytope into two equal-sized parts, as it would in 3 dimensions, just as a diameter (a central line) bisects a circle but does not bisect a sphere. Another difference is that in 4 dimensions not all pairs of great circles intersect at two points, as they do in 3 dimensions; some pairs do, but some pairs of great circles are non-intersecting Clifford parallels.[ad]
 If the Pythagorean distance between any two vertices is √1, their geodesic distance is 1; they may be two adjacent vertices (in the curved 3-space of the surface), or a vertex and the center (in 4-space). If their Pythagorean distance is √2, their geodesic distance is 2 (whether via 3-space or 4-space, because the path along the edges is the same straight line with one 90o bend in it as the path through the center). If their Pythagorean distance is √3, their geodesic distance is still 2 (whether on a hexagonal great circle past one 60o bend, or as a straight line with one 60o bend in it through the center). Finally, if their Pythagorean distance is √4, their geodesic distance is still 2 in 4-space (straight through the center), but it reaches 3 in 3-space (by going halfway around a hexagonal great circle).
 The vertex figure is the facet which is made by truncating a vertex; canonically, at the mid-edges incident to the vertex. But one can make similar vertex figures of different radii by truncating at any point along those edges, up to and including truncating at the adjacent vertices to make a full size vertex figure. Stillwell defines the vertex figure as "the convex hull of the neighbouring vertices of a given vertex".[14] That is what serves the illustrative purpose here.
 The cube is not radially equilateral in Euclidean 3-space, but a cubic pyramid is radially equilateral in the curved 3-space of the 24-cell's surface, the 3-sphere. In 4-space the 8 edges radiating from its apex are not actually its radii: the apex of the cubic pyramid is not actually its center, just one of its vertices. But in curved 3-space the edges radiating symmetrically from the apex are radii, so the cube is radially equilateral in that curved 3-space. In Euclidean 4-space 24 edges radiating symmetrically from a central point make the radially equilateral 24-cell,[b] and a symmetrical subset of 16 of those edges make the radially equilateral tesseract.
 The 24-cell has four sets of 4 non-intersecting Clifford parallel[ad] great circles each passing through 6 vertices (a great hexagon), with only one great hexagon in each set passing through each vertex, and the 4 hexagons in each set reaching all 24 vertices.[r] Each set constitutes a discrete Hopf fibration of non-intersecting linked great circles. The 24-cell can also be divided (eight different ways) into 4 disjoint subsets of 6 vertices (hexagrams) that do not lie in a hexagonal central plane, each skew hexagram forming an isoclinic geodesic or isocline that is the rotational circle traversed by those 6 vertices in one particular left or right isoclinic rotation. Each of these sets of four Clifford parallel isoclines belongs to one of the four discrete Hopf fibrations of hexagonal great circles.[dd]
 Six √2 chords converge in 3-space from the face centers of the 24-cell's cubical vertex figure[ag] and meet at its center (the vertex), where they form 3 straight lines which cross there perpendicularly. The 8 vertices of the cube are the eight nearest other vertices of the 24-cell, and eight √1 edges converge from there, but let us ignore them now, since 7 straight lines crossing at the center is confusing to visualize all at once. Each of the six √2 chords runs from this cube's center (the vertex) through a face center to the center of an adjacent (face-bonded) cube, which is another vertex of the 24-cell: not a nearest vertex (at the cube corners), but one located 90° away in a second concentric shell of six √2-distant vertices that surrounds the first shell of eight √1-distant vertices. The face-center through which the √2 chord passes is the mid-point of the √2 chord, so it lies inside the 24-cell.
 One can cut the 24-cell through 6 vertices (in any hexagonal great circle plane), or through 4 vertices (in any square great circle plane). One can see this in the cuboctahedron (the central hyperplane of the 24-cell), where there are four hexagonal great circles (along the edges) and six square great circles (across the square faces diagonally).
 In the 16-cell the 6 orthogonal great squares form 3 pairs of completely orthogonal great circles; each pair is Clifford parallel. In the 24-cell, the 3 inscribed 16-cells lie rotated 60 degrees isoclinically[m] with respect to each other; consequently their corresponding vertices are 120 degrees apart on a hexagonal great circle. Pairing their vertices which are 90 degrees apart reveals corresponding square great circles which are Clifford parallel. Each of the 18 square great circles is Clifford parallel not only to one other square great circle in the same 16-cell (the completely orthogonal one), but also to two square great circles (which are completely orthogonal to each other) in each of the other two 16-cells. (Completely orthogonal great circles are Clifford parallel, but not all Clifford parallels are orthogonal.[am]) A 60 degree isoclinic rotation of the 24-cell in hexagonal invariant planes takes each square great circle to a Clifford parallel (but non-orthogonal) square great circle in a different 16-cell.
 Each square plane is isoclinic (Clifford parallel) to five other square planes but completely orthogonal to only one of them.[al] Every pair of completely orthogonal planes has Clifford parallel great circles, but not all Clifford parallel great circles are orthogonal (e.g., none of the hexagonal geodesics in the 24-cell are mutually orthogonal).
 In 4-space, two great circles can be perpendicular and share a common center which is their only point of intersection, because there is more than one great 2-sphere on the 3-sphere. The dimensionally analogous structure to a great circle (a great 1-sphere) is a great 2-sphere,[17] which is an ordinary sphere that constitutes an equator boundary dividing the 3-sphere into two equal halves, just as a great circle divides the 2-sphere. Although two Clifford parallel great circles[ad] occupy the same 3-sphere, they lie on different great 2-spheres. The great 2-spheres are Clifford parallel 3-dimensional objects, displaced relative to each other by a fixed distance d in the fourth dimension. Their corresponding points (on their two surfaces) are d apart. The 2-spheres (by which we mean their surfaces) do not intersect at all, although they have a common center point in 4-space. The displacement d between a pair of their corresponding points is the chord of a great circle which intersects both 2-spheres, so d can be represented equivalently as a linear chordal distance, or as an angular distance.
 The 24-cell has three sets of 6 non-intersecting Clifford parallel great circles each passing through 4 vertices (a great square), with only one great square in each set passing through each vertex, and the 6 squares in each set reaching all 24 vertices.[j] Each set constitutes a discrete Hopf fibration of 6 non-intersecting linked great squares, which is simply the compound of the three inscribed 16-cell's discrete Hopf fibrations of 2 great squares. The 24-cell can also be divided (six different ways) into 3 disjoint subsets of 8 vertices (octagrams) that do not lie in a square central plane, but comprise a 16-cell and lie on a skew octagram3 forming an isoclinic geodesic or isocline that is the rotational cirle traversed by those 8 vertices in one particular left or right isoclinic rotation as they rotate positions within the 16-cell.
 The sum of 1・96 + 2・72 + 3・96 + 4・12 is 576.
 The sum of the squared lengths of all the distinct chords of any regular convex n-polytope of unit radius is the square of the number of vertices.[18]
 A point under isoclinic rotation traverses the diagonal[m] straight line of a single isoclinic geodesic, reaching its destination directly, instead of the bent line of two successive simple geodesics.[ca] A geodesic is the shortest path through a space (intuitively, a string pulled taught between two points). Simple geodesics are great circles lying in a central plane (the only kind of geodesics that occur in 3-space on the 2-sphere). Isoclinic geodesics are different: they do not lie in a single plane; they are 4-dimensional spirals rather than simple 2-dimensional circles.[by] But they are not like 3-dimensional screw threads either, because they form a closed loop like any circle.[cu] Isoclinic geodesics are 4-dimensional great circles, and they are just as circular as 2-dimensional circles: in fact, twice as circular, because they curve in two orthogonal great circles at once.[cv] They are true circles,[bz] and even form fibrations like ordinary 2-dimensional great circles.[ai][ao] These isoclines are geodesic 1-dimensional lines embedded in a 4-dimensional space. On the 3-sphere[cw] they always occur in pairs[cy] as Villarceau circles on the Clifford torus, the geodesic paths traversed by vertices in an isoclinic rotation. They are helices bent into a Möbius loop in the fourth dimension, taking a diagonal winding route around the 3-sphere through the non-adjacent vertices[s] of a 4-polytope's skew Clifford polygon.[cj]
 Each pair of parallel √1 edges joins a pair of parallel √3 chords to form one of 48 rectangles (inscribed in the 16 central hexagons), and each pair of parallel √2 chords joins another pair of parallel √2 chords to form one of the 18 central squares.
 One way to visualize the n-dimensional hyperplanes is as the n-spaces which can be defined by n + 1 points. A point is the 0-space which is defined by 1 point. A line is the 1-space which is defined by 2 points which are not coincident. A plane is the 2-space which is defined by 3 points which are not colinear (any triangle). In 4-space, a 3-dimensional hyperplane is the 3-space which is defined by 4 points which are not coplanar (any tetrahedron). In 5-space, a 4-dimensional hyperplane is the 4-space which is defined by 5 points which are not cocellular (any 5-cell). These simplex figures divide the hyperplane into two parts (inside and outside the figure), but in addition they divide the enclosing space into two parts (above and below the hyperplane). The n points bound a finite simplex figure (from the outside), and they define an infinite hyperplane (from the inside).[35] These two divisions are orthogonal, so the defining simplex divides space into six regions: inside the simplex and in the hyperplane, inside the simplex but above or below the hyperplane, outside the simplex but in the hyperplane, and outside the simplex above or below the hyperplane.
 Two angles are required to fix the relative positions of two planes in 4-space.[19] Since all planes in the same hyperplane[at] are 0 degrees apart in one of the two angles, only one angle is required in 3-space. Great hexagons in different hyperplanes are 60 degrees apart in both angles. Great squares in different hyperplanes are 90 degrees apart in both angles (completely orthogonal) or 60 degrees apart in both angles.[al] Planes which are separated by two equal angles are called isoclinic. Planes which are isoclinic have Clifford parallel great circles.[ad] A great square and a great hexagon in different hyperplanes may be isoclinic, but often they are separated by a 90 degree angle and a 60 degree angle.
 Each pair of Clifford parallel polygons lies in two different hyperplanes (cuboctahedrons). The 4 Clifford parallel hexagons lie in 4 different cuboctahedrons.
 Two intersecting great squares or great hexagons share two opposing vertices, but squares or hexagons on Clifford parallel great circles share no vertices. Two intersecting great triangles share only one vertex, since they lack opposing vertices.
 In the 24-cell each great square plane is completely orthogonal to another great square plane, and each great hexagon plane is completely orthogonal to a plane which intersects only two antipodal vertices: a great digon plane.
 Interior features are not considered elements of the polytope. For example, the center of a 24-cell is a noteworthy feature (as are its long radii), but these interior features do not count as elements in its configuration matrix, which counts only elementary features (which are not interior to any other feature including the polytope itself). Interior features are not rendered in most of the diagrams and illustrations in this article (they are normally invisible). In illustrations showing interior features, we always draw interior edges as dashed lines, to distinguish them from elementary edges.
 The 600-cell is larger than the 24-cell, and contains the 24-cell as an interior feature.[20] The regular 5-cell is not found in the interior of any convex regular 4-polytope except the 120-cell,[21] though every convex 4-polytope can be deconstructed into irregular 5-cells.
This animation shows the construction of a rhombic dodecahedron from a cube, by inverting the center-to-face pyramids of a cube. Gosset's construction of a 24-cell from a tesseract is the 4-dimensional analogue of this process, inverting the center-to-cell pyramids of an 8-cell (tesseract).[23]
 We can cut a vertex off a polygon with a 0-dimensional cutting instrument (like the point of a knife, or the head of a zipper) by sweeping it along a 1-dimensional line, exposing a new edge. We can cut a vertex off a polyhedron with a 1-dimensional cutting edge (like a knife) by sweeping it through a 2-dimensional face plane, exposing a new face. We can cut a vertex off a polychoron (a 4-polytope) with a 2-dimensional cutting plane (like a snowplow), by sweeping it through a 3-dimensional cell volume, exposing a new cell. Notice that as within the new edge length of the polygon or the new face area of the polyhedron, every point within the new cell volume is now exposed on the surface of the polychoron.
 Each cell face plane intersects with the other face planes of its kind to which it is not completely orthogonal or parallel at their characteristic vertex chord edge. Adjacent face planes of orthogonally-faced cells (such as cubes) intersect at an edge since they are not completely orthogonal.[i] Although their dihedral angle is 90 degrees in the boundary 3-space, they lie in the same hyperplane[at] (they are coincident rather than perpendicular in the fourth dimension); thus they intersect in a line, as non-parallel planes do in any 3-space.
 The only planes through exactly 6 vertices of the 24-cell (not counting the central vertex) are the 16 hexagonal great circles. There are no planes through exactly 5 vertices. There are several kinds of planes through exactly 4 vertices: the 18 √2 square great circles, the 72 √1 square (tesseract) faces, and 144 √1 by √2 rectangles. The planes through exactly 3 vertices are the 96 √2 equilateral triangle (16-cell) faces, and the 96 √1 equilateral triangle (24-cell) faces. There are an infinite number of central planes through exactly two vertices (great circle digons); 16 are distinguished, as each is completely orthogonal to one of the 16 hexagonal great circles. Only the polygons composed of 24-cell √1 edges are visible in the projections and rotating animations illustrating this article; the others contain invisible interior chords.[ay]
 The 24-cell's cubical vertex figure[ag] has been truncated to a tetrahedral vertex figure (see Kepler's drawing). The vertex cube has vanished, and now there are only 4 corners of the vertex figure where before there were 8. Four tesseract edges converge from the tetrahedron vertices and meet at its center, where they do not cross (since the tetrahedron does not have opposing vertices).
 Two tesseracts share only vertices, not any edges, faces, cubes (with inscribed tetrahedra), or octahedra (whose central square planes are square faces of cubes). An octahedron that touches another octahedron at a vertex (but not at an edge or a face) is touching an octahedron in another tesseract, and a pair of adjacent cubes in the other tesseract whose common square face the octahedron spans, and a tetrahedron inscribed in each of those cubes.
 The common core of the 24-cell and its inscribed 8-cells and 16-cells is the unit-radius 24-cell's insphere-inscribed dual 24-cell of edge length and radius 1/2.[27] Rectifying any of the three 16-cells reveals this smaller 24-cell, which has a 4-content of only 1/8 (1/16 that of the unit-radius 24-cell). Its vertices lie at the centers of the 24-cell's octahedral cells, which are also the centers of the tesseracts' square faces, and are also the centers of the 16-cells' edges.[28]
 The 24-cell's cubical vertex figure[ag] has been truncated to an octahedral vertex figure. The vertex cube has vanished, and now there are only 6 corners of the vertex figure where before there were 8. The 6 √2 chords which formerly converged from cube face centers now converge from octahedron vertices; but just as before, they meet at the center where 3 straight lines cross perpendicularly. The octahedron vertices are located 90° away outside the vanished cube, at the new nearest vertices; before truncation those were 24-cell vertices in the second shell of surrounding vertices.
 Each of the 72 √2 chords in the 24-cell is a face diagonal in two distinct cubical cells (of different 8-cells) and an edge of four tetrahedral cells (in just one 16-cell).
 An orthoscheme is a chiral irregular simplex with right triangle faces that is characteristic of some polytope if it will exactly fill that polytope with the reflections of itself in its own facets (its mirror walls). Every regular polytope can be dissected radially into instances of its characteristic orthoscheme surrounding its center. The characteristic orthoscheme has the shape described by the same Coxeter-Dynkin diagram as the regular polytope without the generating point ring.
 The 24 vertices of the 24-cell, each used twice, are the vertices of three 16-vertex tesseracts.
 The 24 vertices of the 24-cell, each used once, are the vertices of three 8-vertex 16-cells.[n]
 The edges of the 16-cells are not shown in any of the renderings in this article; if we wanted to show interior edges, they could be drawn as dashed lines. The edges of the inscribed tesseracts are always visible, because they are also edges of the 24-cell.
 The 4-dimensional content of the unit edge length tesseract is 1 (by definition). The content of the unit edge length 24-cell is 2, so half its content is inside each tesseract, and half is between their envelopes. Each 16-cell (edge length √2) encloses a content of 2/3, leaving 1/3 of an enclosing tesseract between their envelopes.
 Between the 24-cell envelope and the 8-cell envelope, we have the 8 cubic pyramids of Gosset's construction. Between the 8-cell envelope and the 16-cell envelope, we have 16 right tetrahedral pyramids, with their apexes filling the corners of the tesseract.
 Consider the three perpendicular √2 long diameters of the octahedral cell.[32] Each of them is an edge of a different 16-cell. Two of them are the face diagonals of the square face between two cubes; each is a √2 chord that connects two vertices of those 8-cell cubes across a square face, connects two vertices of two 16-cell tetrahedra (inscribed in the cubes), and connects two opposite vertices of a 24-cell octahedron (diagonally across two of the three orthogonal square central sections).[bi] The third perpendicular long diameter of the octahedron does exactly the same (by symmetry); so it also connects two vertices of a pair of cubes across their common square face: but a different pair of cubes, from one of the other tesseracts in the 24-cell.[bf]
 Because there are three overlapping tesseracts inscribed in the 24-cell,[t] each octahedral cell lies on a cubic cell of one tesseract (in the cubic pyramid based on the cube, but not in the cube's volume), and in two cubic cells of each of the other two tesseracts (cubic cells which it spans, sharing their volume).[bp]
 This might appear at first to be angularly impossible, and indeed it would be in a flat space of only three dimensions. If two cubes rest face-to-face in an ordinary 3-dimensional space (e.g. on the surface of a table in an ordinary 3-dimensional room), an octahedron will fit inside them such that four of its six vertices are at the four corners of the square face between the two cubes; but then the other two octahedral vertices will not lie at a cube corner (they will fall within the volume of the two cubes, but not at a cube vertex). In four dimensions, this is no less true! The other two octahedral vertices do not lie at a corner of the adjacent face-bonded cube in the same tesseract. However, in the 24-cell there is not just one inscribed tesseract (of 8 cubes), there are three overlapping tesseracts (of 8 cubes each). The other two octahedral vertices do lie at the corner of a cube: but a cube in another (overlapping) tesseract.[bq]
 It is important to visualize the radii only as invisible interior features of the 24-cell (dashed lines), since they are not edges of the honeycomb. Similarly, the center of the 24-cell is empty (not a vertex of the honeycomb).
 Unlike the 24-cell and the tesseract, the 16-cell is not radially equilateral; therefore 16-cells of two different sizes (unit edge length versus unit radius) occur in the unit edge length honeycomb. The twenty-four 16-cells that meet at the center of each 24-cell have unit edge length, and radius √2 / 2. The three 16-cells inscribed in each 24-cell have edge length √2, and unit radius.
 Three dimensional rotations occur around an axis line. Four dimensional rotations may occur around a plane. So in three dimensions we may fold planes around a common line (as when folding a flat net of 6 squares up into a cube), and in four dimensions we may fold cells around a common plane (as when folding a flat net of 8 cubes up into a tesseract). Folding around a square face is just folding around two of its orthogonal edges at the same time; there is not enough space in three dimensions to do this, just as there is not enough space in two dimensions to fold around a line (only enough to fold around a point).
 There are (at least) two kinds of correct dimensional analogies: the usual kind between dimension n and dimension n + 1, and the much rarer and less obvious kind between dimension n and dimension n + 2. An example of the latter is that rotations in 4-space may take place around a single point, as do rotations in 2-space. Another is the n-sphere rule that the surface area of the sphere embedded in n+2 dimensions is exactly 2π r times the volume enclosed by the sphere embedded in n dimensions, the most well-known examples being that the circumference of a circle is 2π r times 1, and the surface area of the ordinary sphere is 2π r times 2r. Coxeter cites[44] this as an instance in which dimensional analogy can fail us as a method, but it is really our failure to recognize whether a one- or two-dimensional analogy is the appropriate method.
 Rotations in 4-dimensional Euclidean space may occur around a plane, as when adjacent cells are folded around their plane of intersection (by analogy to the way adjacent faces are folded around their line of intersection).[bu] But in four dimensions there is yet another way in which rotations can occur, called a double rotation. Double rotations are an emergent phenomenon in the fourth dimension and have no analogy in three dimensions: folding up square faces and folding up cubical cells are both examples of simple rotations, the only kind that occur in fewer than four dimensions. In 3-dimensional rotations, the points in a line remain fixed during the rotation, while every other point moves. In 4-dimensional simple rotations, the points in a plane remain fixed during the rotation, while every other point moves. In 4-dimensional double rotations, a point remains fixed during rotation, and every other point moves (as in a 2-dimensional rotation!).[bv]
 In a Clifford displacement, also known as an isoclinic rotation, all the Clifford parallel[ad] invariant planes are displaced in four orthogonal directions at once: they are rotated by the same angle, and at the same time they are tilted sideways by that same angle in the completely orthogonal rotation.[bz] A Clifford displacement is 4-dimensionally diagonal.[m] Every plane that is Clifford parallel to one of the completely orthogonal planes (including in this case an entire Clifford parallel bundle of 4 hexagons, but not all 16 hexagons) is invariant under the isoclinic rotation: all the points in the plane rotate in circles but remain in the plane, even as the whole plane tilts sideways.[cb] All 16 hexagons rotate by the same angle (though only 4 of them do so invariantly). All 16 hexagons are rotated by 60 degrees, and also displaced sideways by 60 degrees to a Clifford parallel hexagon. All of the other central polygons (e.g. squares) are also displaced to a Clifford parallel polygon 60 degrees away.
 In a double rotation each vertex can be said to move along two completely orthogonal great circles at the same time, but it does not stay within the central plane of either of those original great circles; rather, it moves along a helical geodesic that traverses diagonally between great circles. The two completely orthogonal planes of rotation are said to be invariant because the points in each stay in their places in the plane as the plane moves, rotating and tilting sideways by the angle that the other plane rotates.
 An isoclinic rotation by 60° is two simple rotations by 60° at the same time.[ct] It moves all the vertices 120° at the same time, in various different directions. Six successive diagonal rotational increments, of 60°x60° each, move each vertex through 720° on a Möbius double loop called an isocline, twice around the 24-cell and back to its point of origin, in the same time (six rotational units) that it would take a simple rotation to take the vertex once around the 24-cell on an ordinary great circle.[cu] The helical double loop 4𝝅 isocline is just another kind of single full circle, of the same time interval and period (6 chords) as the simple great circle. The isocline is one true circle,[cv] as perfectly round and geodesic as the simple great circle, even through its chords are √3 longer, its circumference is 4𝝅 instead of 2𝝅,[cx] it circles through four dimensions instead of two,[cy] and it acts in two chiral forms (left and right) even though all such circles of the same circumference are directly congruent.[cj] Nevertheless, to avoid confusion we always refer to it as an isocline and reserve the term great circle for an ordinary great circle in the plane.[cz]
 Any double rotation (including an isoclinic rotation) can be seen as the composition of two simple rotations a and b: the left double rotation as a then b, and the right double rotation as b then a. Simple rotations are not commutative; left and right rotations (in general) reach different destinations. The difference between a double rotation and its two composing simple rotations is that the double rotation is 4-dimensionally diagonal: each moving vertex reaches its destination directly without passing through the intermediate point touched by a then b, or the other intermediate point touched by b then a, by rotating on a single helical geodesic (so it is the shortest path).[by] Conversely, any simple rotation can be seen as the composition of two equal-angled double rotations (a left isoclinic rotation and a right isoclinic rotation),[bz] as discovered by Cayley; perhaps surprisingly, this composition is commutative, and is possible for any double rotation as well.[47]
 In an isoclinic rotation each invariant plane is Clifford parallel to the plane it moves to, and they do not intersect at any time (except at the central point). In a simple rotation the invariant plane intersects the plane it moves to in a line, and moves to it by rotating around that line.
 A rotation in 4-space is completely characterized by choosing an invariant plane and an angle and direction (left or right) through which it rotates, and another angle and direction through which its one completely orthogonal invariant plane rotates. Two rotational displacements are identical if they have the same pair of invariant planes of rotation, through the same angles in the same directions (and hence also the same chiral pairing of directions). Thus the general rotation in 4-space is a double rotation, characterized by two angles. A simple rotation is a special case in which one rotational angle is 0.[ca] An isoclinic rotation is a different special case,[bx] similar but not identical to two simple rotations through the same angle.[cb]
 The adjectives left and right are commonly used in two different senses, to distinguish two distinct kinds of pairing. They can refer to alternate directions: the hand on the left side of the body, versus the hand on the right side. Or they can refer to a chiral pair of enantiomorphous objects: a left hand is the mirror image of a right hand (like an inside-out glove). In the case of hands the sense intended is rarely ambiguous, because of course the hand on your left side is the mirror image of the hand on your right side: a hand is either left or right in both senses. But in the case of double-rotating 4-dimensional objects, only one sense of left versus right properly applies: the enantiomorphous sense, in which the left and right rotation are inside-out mirror images of each other. There are two directions, which we may call positive and negative, in which moving vertices may be circling on their isoclines, but it would be ambiguous to label those circular directions "right" and "left", since a rotation's direction and its chirality are independent properties: a right (or left) rotation may be circling in either the positive or negative direction. The left rotation is not rotating "to the left", the right rotation is not rotating "to the right", and unlike your left and right hands, double rotations do not lie on the left or right side of the 4-polytope. If double rotations must be analogized to left and right hands, they are better thought of as a pair of clasped hands, centered on the body, because of course they have a common center.
 The 24-cell's Petrie polygon is a skew dodecagon {12} and also (orthogonally) a skew dodecagram {12/5} which zig-zags 90° left and right like the edges dividing the black and white squares on the chessboard.[64] In contrast, the skew hexagram2 isocline does not zig-zag, and stays on one side or the other of the dividing line between black and white, like the bishops' paths along the diagonals of either the black or white squares of the chessboard.[s] The Petrie dodecagon is a circular helix of √1 edges that zig-zag 90° left and right along 12 edges of 6 different octahedra (with 3 consecutive edges in each octahedron) in a 360° rotation. In contrast, the isoclinic hexagram2 has √3 edges which all bend either left or right at every second vertex along a geodesic spiral of both chiralities (left and right)[cj] but only one color (black or white),[cm] visiting one vertex of each of those same 6 octahedra in a 720° rotation.
 √3/4 ≈ 0.866 is the long radius of the √2-edge regular tetrahedron (the unit-radius 16-cell's cell). Those four tetrahedron radii are not orthogonal, and they radiate symmetrically compressed into 3 dimensions (not 4). The four orthogonal √3/4 ≈ 0.866 displacements summing to a 120° degree displacement in the 24-cell's characteristic isoclinic rotation[m] are not as easy to visualize as radii, but they can be imagined as successive orthogonal steps in a path extending in all 4 dimensions, along the orthogonal edges of a 4-orthoscheme. In an actual left (or right) isoclinic rotation the four orthogonal √3/4 ≈ 0.866 steps of each 120° displacement are concurrent, not successive, so they are actually symmetrical radii in 4 dimensions. In fact they are four orthogonal mid-edge radii of a unit-radius 24-cell centered at the rotating vertex. Finally, in 2 dimensional units, √3/4 ≈ 0.866 is the area of the equilateral triangle face of the unit-edge, unit-radius 24-cell. The area of the radial equilateral triangles in a unit-radius radially equilateral polytope[b] is √3/4 ≈ 0.866.
 That a double rotation can turn a 4-polytope inside out is even more noticeable in the tesseract double rotation.
 Since it is difficult to color points and lines white, we sometimes use black and red instead of black and white. In particular, isocline chords are sometimes shown as black or red dashed lines.[ay]
 Each great square plane is isoclinic (Clifford parallel) to five other square planes but completely orthogonal to only one of them.[al] Every pair of completely orthogonal planes has Clifford parallel great circles, but not all Clifford parallel great circles are orthogonal (e.g., none of the hexagonal geodesics in the 24-cell are mutually orthogonal). There is also another way in which completely orthogonal planes are in a distinguished category of Clifford parallel planes: they are not chiral, or strictly speaking they possess both chiralities. A pair of isoclinic (Clifford parallel) planes is either a left pair or a right pair, unless they are separated by two angles of 90° (completely orthogonal planes) or 0° (coincident planes).[57] Most isoclinic planes are brought together only by a left isoclinic rotation or a right isoclinic rotation, respectively. Completely orthogonal planes are special: the pair of planes is both a left and a right pair, so either a left or a right isoclinic rotation will bring them together. This occurs because isoclinic square planes are 180° apart at all vertex pairs: not just Clifford parallel but completely orthogonal. The isoclines (chiral vertex paths)[ar] of 90° isoclinic rotations are special for the same reason. Left and right isoclines loop through the same set of antipodal vertices (hitting both ends of each 16-cell axis), instead of looping through disjoint left and right subsets of black or white antipodal vertices (hitting just one end of each axis), as the left and right isoclines of all other fibrations do.
 The chord-path of an isocline (the geodesic along which a vertex moves under isoclinic rotation) may be called the 4-polytope's Clifford polygon, as it is the skew polygonal shape of the rotational circles traversed by the 4-polytope's vertices in its characteristic Clifford displacement.[63] The isocline is a helical Möbius double loop which reverses its chirality twice in the course of a full double circuit. The double loop is entirely contained within a single cell ring, where it follows chords connecting even (odd) vertices: typically opposite vertices of adjacent cells, two edge lengths apart.[cm] Both "halves" of the double loop pass through each cell in the cell ring, but intersect only two even (odd) vertices in each even (odd) cell. Each pair of intersected vertices in an even (odd) cell lie opposite each other on the Möbius strip, exactly one edge length apart. Thus each cell has both helices passing through it, which are Clifford parallels[ad] of opposite chirality at each pair of parallel points. Globally these two helices are a single connected circle of both chiralities, with no net torsion. An isocline acts as a left (or right) isocline when traversed by a left (or right) rotation (of different fibrations).[bz]
 Chirality and even/odd parity are distinct flavors. Things which have even/odd coordinate parity are black or white: the squares of the chessboard,[ch] cells, vertices and the isoclines which connect them by isoclinic rotation.[ar] Everything else is black and white: e.g. adjacent face-bonded cell pairs, or edges and chords which are black at one end and white at the other. Things which have chirality come in right or left enantiomorphous forms: isoclinic rotations and chiral objects which include characteristic orthoschemes, sets of Clifford parallel great polygon planes,[ci] fiber bundles of Clifford parallel circles (whether or not the circles themselves are chiral), and the chiral cell rings found in the 16-cell and 600-cell. Things which have neither an even/odd parity nor a chirality include all edges and faces (shared by black and white cells), great circle polygons and their fibrations, and non-chiral cell rings such as the 24-cell's cell rings of octahedra. Some things have both an even/odd parity and a chirality: isoclines are black or white because they connect vertices which are all of the same color, and they act as left or right chiral objects when they are vertex paths in a left or right rotation, although they have no inherent chirality themselves. Each left (or right) rotation traverses an equal number of black and white isoclines.[cj]
 Left and right isoclinic rotations partition the 24 cells (and 24 vertices) into black and white in the same way.[42] The rotations of all fibrations of the same kind of great polygon use the same chessboard, which is a convention of the coordinate system based on even and odd coordinates. Left and right are not colors: in either a left (or right) rotation half the moving vertices are black, running along black isoclines through black vertices, and the other half are white vertices, also rotating among themselves.[ck]
 Isoclinic rotations[ar] partition the 24 cells (and the 24 vertices) of the 24-cell into two disjoint subsets of 12 cells (and 12 vertices), even and odd (or black and white), which shift places among themselves, in a manner dimensionally analogous to the way the bishops' diagonal moves[s] restrict them to the black or white squares of the chessboard.[cl]
 Although adjacent vertices on the isoclinic geodesic are a √3 chord apart, a point on a rigid body under rotation does not travel along a chord: it moves along an arc between the two endpoints of the chord (a longer distance). In a simple rotation between two vertices √3 apart, the vertex moves along the arc of a hexagonal great circle to a vertex two great hexagon edges away, and passes through the intervening hexagon vertex midway. But in an isoclinic rotation between two vertices √3 apart the vertex moves along a helical arc called an isocline (not a planar great circle),[ar] which does not pass through an intervening vertex: it misses the vertex nearest to its midpoint.[s]
 P0 and P1 lie in the same hyperplane (the same central cuboctahedron) so their other angle of separation is 0.[au]
 V0 and V2 are two √3 chords apart on the geodesic path of this rotational isocline, but that is not the shortest geodesic path between them. In the 24-cell, it is impossible for two vertices to be more distant than one √3 chord, unless they are antipodal vertices √4 apart.[af] V0 and V2 are one √3 chord apart on some other isocline, and just √1 apart on some great hexagon. Between V0 and V2, the isoclinic rotation has gone the long way around the 24-cell over two √3 chords to reach a vertex that was only √1 away. More generally, isoclines are geodesics because the distance between their successive vertices is the shortest distance between those two vertices in some rotation connecting them, but on the 3-sphere there may be another rotation which is shorter. A path between two vertices along a geodesic is not always the shortest distance between them (even on ordinary great circle geodesics).
 P0 and P2 are 60° apart in both angles of separation.[au] Clifford parallel planes are isoclinic (which means they are separated by two equal angles), and their corresponding vertices are all the same distance apart. Although V0 and V2 are two √3 chords apart,[cp] P0 and P2 are just one √1 edge apart (at every pair of nearest vertices).
 Each half of a skew hexagram is an open triangle of three √3 chords, the two open ends of which are one √1 edge length apart. The two halves, like the whole isocline, have no inherent chirality but the same parity-color (black or white). The halves are the two opposite "edges" of a Möbius strip that is √1 wide; it actually has only one edge, which is a single continuous circle with 6 chords.
 Departing from any vertex V0 in the original great hexagon plane of isoclinic rotation P0, the first vertex reached V1 is 120 degrees away along a √3 chord lying in a different hexagonal plane P1. P1 is inclined to P0 at a 60° angle.[co] The second vertex reached V2 is 120 degrees beyond V1 along a second √3 chord lying in another hexagonal plane P2 that is Clifford parallel to P0.[cq] (Notice that V1 lies in both intersecting planes P1 and P2, as V0 lies in both P0 and P1. But P0 and P2 have no vertices in common; they do not intersect.) The third vertex reached V3 is 120 degrees beyond V2 along a third √3 chord lying in another hexagonal plane P3 that is Clifford parallel to P1. V0 and V3 are adjacent vertices, √1 apart.[cr] The three √3 chords lie in different 8-cells.[t] V0 to V3 is a 360° isoclinic rotation, and one half of the 24-cell's double-loop hexagram2 Clifford polygon.[cj]
 The composition of two simple 60° rotations in a pair of completely orthogonal invariant planes is a 60° isoclinic rotation in four pairs of completely orthogonal invariant planes.[ca] Thus the isoclinic rotation is the compound of four simple rotations, and all 24 vertices rotate in invariant hexagon planes, versus just 6 vertices in a simple rotation.
 Because the 24-cell's helical hexagram2 geodesic is bent into a twisted ring in the fourth dimension like a Möbius strip, its screw thread doubles back across itself in each revolution, reversing its chirality[cj] but without ever changing its even/odd parity of rotation (black or white).[cm] The 6-vertex isoclinic path forms a Möbius double loop, like a 3-dimensional double helix with the ends of its two parallel 3-vertex helices cross-connected to each other. This 60° isocline[dc] is a skewed instance of the regular compound polygon denoted {6/2}=2{3} or hexagram2.[cr] Successive √3 edges belong to different 8-cells, as the 720° isoclinic rotation takes each hexagon through all six hexagons in the 6-cell ring, and each 8-cell through all three 8-cells twice.[t]
 Isoclinic geodesics or isoclines are 4-dimensional great circles in the sense that they are 1-dimensional geodesic lines that curve in 4-space in two orthogonal great circles at once.[cw] They should not be confused with great 2-spheres,[17] which are the 4-dimensional analogues of great circles (great 1-spheres).[an] Discrete isoclines are polygons;[cj] discrete great 2-spheres are polyhedra.
 All isoclines are geodesics, and isoclines on the 3-sphere are circles (curving equally in each dimension), but not all isoclines on 3-manifolds in 4-space are circles.
 All 3-sphere isoclines of the same circumference are directly congruent circles.[cw] An ordinary great circle is an isocline of circumference 2πr simple rotations of unit-radius polytopes take place on 2𝝅 isoclines. Double rotations may have isoclines of other than 2πr circumference. The characteristic rotation of a regular 4-polytope is the isoclinic rotation in which the central planes containing its edges are invariant planes of rotation. The 16-cell and 24-cell edge-rotate on isoclines of 4𝝅 circumference. The 600-cell edge-rotates on isoclines of 5𝝅 circumference.
 Isoclines on the 3-sphere occur in non-intersecting pairs of even/odd coordinate parity.[cm] A single black or white isocline forms a Möbius loop called the {1,1} torus knot or Villarceau circle[55] in which each of two "circles" linked in a Möbius "figure eight" loop traverses through all four dimensions.[cj] The double loop is a true circle in four dimensions.[bz] Even and odd isoclines are also linked, not in a Möbius loop but as a Hopf link of two non-intersecting circles,[ad] as are all the Clifford parallel isoclines of a Hopf fiber bundle.
 An isocline is the circular geodesic path taken by a vertex that lies in an invariant plane of rotation, during a complete revolution. In an isoclinic rotation every vertex lies in an invariant plane of rotation, and the isocline it rotates on is a helical geodesic circle that winds through all four dimensions, not a simple geodesic great circle in the plane. In a simple rotation there is only one invariant plane of rotation, and each vertex that lies in it rotates on a simple geodesic great circle in the plane. Both the helical geodesic isocline of an isoclinic rotation and the simple geodesic isocline of a simple rotation are great circles, but to avoid confusion between them we generally reserve the term isocline for the former, and reserve the term great circle for the latter, an ordinary great circle in the plane. Strictly, however, the latter is an isocline of circumference 2πr, and the former is an isocline of circumference greater than 2πr.[ar]
 In a 720° isoclinic rotation of a rigid 24-cell the 24 vertices rotate along four separate Clifford parallel hexagram2 geodesic loops (six vertices circling in each loop) and return to their original positions.[cy]
 The length of a strip can be measured at its centerline, or by cutting the resulting Möbius strip perpendicularly to its boundary so that it forms a rectangle.
 A strip of paper can form a flattened Möbius strip in the plane by folding it at 60∘ angles so that its center line lies along an equilateral triangle, and attaching the ends. The shortest strip for which this is possible consists of three equilateral paper triangles, folded at the edges where two triangles meet. Since the loop traverses both sides of each paper triangle, it is a hexagonal loop over six equilateral triangles. Its aspect ratio – the ratio of the strip's length[db] to its width – is 3≈1.73.
 Each set of Clifford parallel great circle polygons is a different bundle of fibers than the corresponding set of Clifford parallel isocline[ar] polygrams, but the two fiber bundles together constitute the same discrete Hopf fibration, because they enumerate the 24 vertices together by their intersection in the same distinct (left or right) isoclinic rotation. They are the warp and woof of the same woven fabric that is the fibration.
 The choice of a partitioning of a regular 4-polytope into cell rings (a fibration) is arbitrary, because all of its cells are identical. No particular fibration is distinguished, unless the 4-polytope is rotating. Each fibration corresponds to a left-right pair of isoclinic rotations in a particular set of Clifford parallel invariant central planes of rotation. In the 24-cell, distinguishing a hexagonal fibration[ai] means choosing a cell-disjoint set of four 6-cell rings that is the unique container of a left-right pair of isoclinic rotations in four Clifford parallel hexagonal invariant planes. The left and right rotations take place in chiral subspaces of that container,[62] but the fibration and the octahedral cell rings themselves are not chiral objects.[dm]
 All isoclinic planes are Clifford parallels (completely disjoint).[w] Three and four dimensional cocentric objects may intersect (sharing elements) but still be related by an isoclinic rotation. Polyhedra and 4-polytopes may be isoclinic and not disjoint, if all of their corresponding planes are either Clifford parallel, or cocellular (in the same hyperplane) or coincident (the same plane).
 By generate we mean simply that some vertex of the first polytope will visit each vertex of the generated polytope in the course of the rotation.
 Like a key operating a four-dimensional lock, an object must twist in two completely perpendicular tumbler cylinders in order to move the short distance between Clifford parallel subspaces.
 Just as each face of a polyhedron occupies a different (2-dimensional) face plane, each cell of a polychoron occupies a different (3-dimensional) cell hyperplane.[at]
 There is a choice of planes in which to fold the column into a ring, but they are equivalent in that they produce congruent rings. Whichever folding planes are chosen, each of the six helices joins its own two ends and forms a simple great circle hexagon. These hexagons are not helices: they lie on ordinary flat great circles. Three of them are Clifford parallel[ad] and belong to one hexagonal fibration. They intersect the other three, which belong to another hexagonal fibration. The three parallel great circles of each fibration spiral around each other in the sense that they form a link of three ordinary circles, but they are not twisted: the 6-cell ring has no torsion, either clockwise or counterclockwise.[dm]
 When unit-edge octahedra are placed face-to-face the distance between their centers of volume is √2/3 ≈ 0.816.[60] When 24 face-bonded octahedra are bent into a 24-cell lying on the 3-sphere, the centers of the octahedra are closer together in 4-space. Within the curved 3-dimensional surface space filled by the 24 cells, the cell centers are still √2/3 apart along the curved geodesics that join them. But on the straight chords that join them, which dip inside the 3-sphere, they are only 1/2 edge length apart.
 The axial hexagon of the 6-octahedron ring does not intersect any vertices or edges of the 24-cell, but it does hit faces. In a unit-edge-length 24-cell, it has edges of length 1/2.[dk] Because it joins six cell centers, the axial hexagon is a great hexagon of the smaller dual 24-cell that is formed by joining the 24 cell centers.[bg]
 Only one kind of 6-cell ring exists, not two different chiral kinds (right-handed and left-handed), because octahedra have opposing faces and form untwisted cell rings. In addition to two sets of three Clifford parallel[ad] great hexagons, three black and three white isoclinic hexagram geodesics run through the 6-cell ring.[ai] Each of these chiral skew hexagrams lies on a different kind of circle called an isocline,[cw] a helical circle winding through all four dimensions instead of lying in a single plane.[ar] These helical great circles occur in Clifford parallel fiber bundles just as ordinary planar great circles do. In the 6-cell ring, black and white hexagrams pass through even and odd vertices respectively, and miss the vertices in between, so the isoclines are disjoint.[cm]
 The three great hexagons are Clifford parallel, which is different than ordinary parallelism.[ad] Clifford parallel great hexagons pass through each other like adjacent links of a chain, forming a Hopf link. Unlike links in a 3-dimensional chain, they share the same center point. In the 24-cell, Clifford parallel great hexagons occur in sets of four, not three. The fourth parallel hexagon lies completely outside the 6-cell ring; its 6 vertices are completely disjoint from the ring's 18 vertices.
 In the column of 6 octahedral cells, we number the cells 0-5 going up the column. We also label each vertex with an integer 0-5 based on how many edge lengths it is up the column.
 An isoclinic rotation by a multiple of 60° takes even-numbered octahedra in the ring to even-numbered octahedra, and odd-numbered octahedra to odd-numbered octahedra.[do] It is impossible for an even-numbered octahedron to reach an odd-numbered octahedron, or vice versa, by a left or a right isoclinic rotation alone.[cm]
 The dual polytope of the 24-cell is another 24-cell. It can be constructed by placing vertices at the 24 cell centers. Each 6-cell ring corresponds to a great hexagon in the dual 24-cell, so there are 16 distinct 6-cell rings, as there are 16 distinct great hexagons, each belonging to just one fibration.
 Two central planes in which the path bends 60° at the vertex are (a) the great hexagon plane that the chord before the vertex belongs to, and (b) the great hexagon plane that the chord after the vertex belongs to. Plane (b) contains the 120° isocline chord joining the original vertex to a vertex in great hexagon plane (c), Clifford parallel to (a); the vertex moves over this chord to this next vertex. The angle of inclination between the Clifford parallel (isoclinic) great hexagon planes (a) and (c) is also 60°. In this 60° interval of the isoclinic rotation, great hexagon plane (a) rotates 60° within itself and tilts 60° in an orthogonal plane (not plane (b)) to become great hexagon plane (c). The three great hexagon planes (a), (b) and (c) are not orthogonal (they are inclined at 60° to each other), but (a) and (b) are two central hexagons in the same cuboctahedron, and (b) and (c) likewise in an orthogonal cuboctahedron.[q]
 Each vertex of the 6-cell ring is intersected by two skew hexagrams of the same parity (black or white) belonging to different fibrations.[dm]
 Each vertex of a 6-cell ring is missed by the two halves of the same Möbius double loop hexagram,[du] which curve past it on either side.
 At each vertex there is only one adjacent great hexagon plane that the isocline can bend 60 degrees into: the isoclinic path is deterministic in the sense that it is linear, not branching, because each vertex in the cell ring is a place where just two of the six great hexagons contained in the cell ring cross. If each great hexagon is given edges and chords of a particular color (as in the 6-cell ring illustration), we can name each great hexagon by its color, and each kind of vertex by a hyphenated two-color name. The cell ring contains 18 vertices named by the 9 unique two-color combinations; each vertex and its antipodal vertex have the same two colors in their name, since when two great hexagons intersect they do so at antipodal vertices. Each isoclinic skew hexagram[cr] contains one √3 chord of each color, and visits 6 of the 9 different color-pairs of vertex.[ds] Each 6-cell ring contains six such isoclinic skew hexagrams, three black and three white.[dt]
 The √3 chord passes through the mid-edge of one of the 24-cell's √1 radii. Since the 24-cell can be constructed, with its long radii, from √1 triangles which meet at its center,[b] this is a mid-edge of one of the six √1 triangles in a great hexagon, as seen in the chord diagram.
 Each pair of adjacent edges of a great hexagon has just one isocline curving alongside it,[dt] missing the vertex between the two edges (but not the way the √3 edge of the great triangle inscribed in the great hexagon misses the vertex,[dv] because the isocline is an arc on the surface not a chord). If we number the vertices around the hexagon 0-5, the hexagon has three pairs of adjacent edges connecting even vertices (one inscribed great triangle), and three pairs connecting odd vertices (the other inscribed great triangle). Even and odd pairs of edges have the arc of a black and a white isocline respectively curving alongside.[cm] The three black and three white isoclines belong to the same 6-cell ring of the same fibration.[du]
 Each hexagram isocline hits only one end of an axis, unlike a great circle which hits both ends. Clifford parallel pairs of black and white isoclines from the same left-right pair of isoclinic rotations (the same fibration) do not intersect, but they hit opposite (antipodal) vertices of one of the 24-cell's 12 axes.
 The isoclines themselves are not left or right, only the bundles are. Each isocline is left and right.[cj]
 The 12 black-white pairs of hexagram isoclines in each fibration[dx] and the 16 distinct hexagram isoclines in the 24-cell form a Reye configuration 124163, just the way the 24-cell's 12 axes and 16 hexagons do. Each of the 12 black-white pairs occurs in one cell ring of each fibration of 4 hexagram isoclines, and each cell ring contains 3 black-white pairs of the 16 hexagram isoclines.
 As in the 16-cell, the isocline is an octagram which intersects only 8 vertices, even though the 24-cell has more vertices closer together than the 16-cell. The isocline curve misses the additional vertices in between. As in the 16-cell, the first vertex it intersects is √2 away. The 24-cell employs more octagram isoclines (3 in parallel in each rotation) than the 16-cell does (1 in each rotation). The 3 helical isoclines are Clifford parallel;[ad] they spiral around each other in a triple helix, with the disjoint helices' corresponding vertex pairs joined by √1 = 60° chords. The triple helix of 3 isoclines contains 24 disjoint √2 edges (6 disjoint great squares) and 24 vertices, and constitutes a discrete fibration of the 24-cell, just as the 4-cell ring does.
 The 600-cell's isoclinic rotation in great square planes takes whole 16-cells to other 16-cells in different 24-cells.
 (Coxeter 1973) uses the greek letter 𝝓 (phi) to represent one of the three characteristic angles 𝟀, 𝝓, 𝟁 of a regular polytope. Because 𝝓 is commonly used to represent the golden ratio constant ≈ 1.618, for which Coxeter uses 𝝉 (tau), we reverse Coxeter's conventions, and use 𝝉 to represent the characteristic angle.
 For a regular k-polytope, the Coxeter-Dynkin diagram of the characteristic k-orthoscheme is the k-polytope's diagram without the generating point ring. The regular k-polytope is subdivided by its symmetry (k-1)-elements into g instances of its characteristic k-orthoscheme that surround its center, where g is the order of the k-polytope's symmetry group.[70]
 The four edges of each 4-orthoscheme which meet at the center of the regular 4-polytope are of unequal length, because they are the four characteristic radii of the regular 4-polytope: a vertex radius, an edge center radius, a face center radius, and a cell center radius. The five vertices of the 4-orthoscheme always include one regular 4-polytope vertex, one regular 4-polytope edge center, one regular 4-polytope face center, one regular 4-polytope cell center, and the regular 4-polytope center. Those five vertices (in that order) comprise a path along four mutually perpendicular edges (that makes three right angle turns), the characteristic feature of a 4-orthoscheme. The 4-orthoscheme has five dissimilar 3-orthoscheme facets.
 The reflecting surface of a (3-dimensional) polyhedron consists of 2-dimensional faces; the reflecting surface of a (4-dimensional) polychoron consists of 3-dimensional cells.
 Let Q denote a rotation, R a reflection, T a translation, and let Qq Rr T denote a product of several such transformations, all commutative with one another. Then RT is a glide-reflection (in two or three dimensions), QR is a rotary-reflection, QT is a screw-displacement, and Q2 is a double rotation (in four dimensions). Every orthogonal transformation is expressible as Qq Rr where 2q + r ≤ n, the number of dimensions. Transformations involving a translation are expressible as Qq Rr T where 2q + r + 1 ≤ n. For n = 4 in particular, every displacement is either a double rotation Q2, or a screw-displacement QT (where the rotation component Q is a simple rotation). Every enantiomorphous transformation in 4-space (reversing chirality) is a QRT.[73]
 The left planes are Clifford parallel, and the right planes are Clifford parallel; each set of planes is a fibration. Each left plane is Clifford parallel to its corresponding right plane in an isoclinic rotation,[cb] but the two sets of planes are not all mutually Clifford parallel; they are different fibrations, except in table rows where the left and right planes are the same set.
 The ±q7 and ±q8 sets of planes are not disjoint; the union of any two of these four sets is a set of 6 planes. The left (versus right) isoclinic rotation of each of these rotation classes (table rows) visits a distinct left (versus right) circular sequence of the same set of 6 Clifford parallel planes.
 A quaternion group ±qn corresponds to a distinct set of Clifford parallel great circle polygons, e.g. q 7 corresponds to a set of four disjoint great hexagons.[r] Note that qn and −qn generally are distinct sets. The corresponding vertices of the qn planes and the −qn planes are 180° apart.[au]
 A quaternion Cartesian coordinate designates a vertex joined to a top vertex by one instance of a distinct chord. The conventional top vertex of a unit radius 4-polytope in standard (vertex-up) orientation is designates a √1 chord of 60° arc-length. Each such distinct chord is an edge of a distinct great circle polygon, in this example a great hexagon, intersecting the north and south poles. Great circle polygons occur in sets of Clifford parallel central planes, each set of disjoint great circles comprising a discrete Hopf fibration that intersects every vertex just once. One great circle polygon in each set intersects the north and south poles. This quaternion coordinate is thus representative of the 4 disjoint great hexagons pictured, a quaternion group[ej] which comprise one distinct fibration of the [16] great hexagons (four fibrations of great hexagons) that occur in the 24-cell.[r]
 In an isoclinic rotation, all the Left planes move together, remain Clifford parallel while moving, and carry all their points with them to the Right planes as they move: they are invariant planes.[cb] Because the left (and right) set of central polygons are a fibration covering all the vertices, every vertex is a point carried along in an invariant plane.
 Each class of rotational displacements (each table row) corresponds to a distinct rigid left (and right) isoclinic rotation in multiple invariant planes concurrently.[el] The Isocline is the path followed by a vertex,[cz] which is a helical geodesic circle that does not lie in any one central plane. Each rotational displacement takes one invariant Left plane to the corresponding invariant Right plane, with all the left (or right) displacements taking place concurrently.[cb] Each left plane is separated from the corresponding right plane by two equal angles,[au] each equal to one half of the arc-angle by which each vertex is displaced (the angle and distance that appears in the Rotation class column).
 Each hexagon rides on only three skew hexagram isoclines, not six, because opposite vertices of each hexagon ride on opposing rails of the same Clifford hexagram, in the same (not opposite) rotational direction.[cj]
 In this orthogonal projection of the 24-point 24-cell to a {12/4}=4{3} dodecagram, each point represents two vertices, and each line represents multiple √3 chords. Each disjoint triangle can be seen as a skew {6/2} hexagram with √3 edges: two open skew triangles with their opposite ends connected in a Möbius loop with a circumference of 4𝝅. The hexagram projects to a single triangle in two dimensions because it skews through all four dimensions. Those 4 disjoint skew hexagram isoclines are the Clifford parallel circular vertex paths of the fibration's characteristic left (and right) isoclinic rotation.[ar] The 4 Clifford parallel great hexagons of the fibration are invariant planes of this rotation. The great hexagons rotate in incremental displacements of 60° like wheels and 60° orthogonally like coins flipping, displacing each vertex by 120°, as their vertices move along parallel helical isocline paths through successive Clifford parallel hexagon planes.[en] Alternatively, the 4 triangles can be seen as 8 disjoint triangles: 4 pairs of Clifford parallel great triangles, where two opposing great triangles lie in the same great hexagon central plane, so a fibration of 4 Clifford parallel great hexagon planes is represented.[r] This illustrates that the 4 hexagram isoclines also correspond to a distinct fibration, in fact the same fibration as 4 great hexagons.
 The isoclinic rotation in great hexagon invariant planes takes each vertex to a vertex two vertices away (120° = √3 away), without passing through any intervening vertices. Each left hexagon rotates 60° (like a wheel) at the same time that it tilts sideways by 60° (in an orthogonal central plane) into its corresponding right hexagon plane. Repeated 6 times, this rotational displacement turns the 24-cell through 720° and returns it to its original orientation.
 In this orthogonal projection of the 24-point 24-cell to a {12/4}=4{3} dodecagram, each point represents two vertices, and each line represents multiple √3 chords. The 4 triangles can be seen as 8 disjoint triangles: 4 pairs of Clifford parallel great triangles, where two opposing great triangles lie in the same great hexagon central plane, so a fibration of 4 Clifford parallel great hexagon planes is represented, as in the 4 left planes of this rotation class (table row).[r]
 Each hexagon rides on only two parallel dodecagon isoclines, not six, because only alternate vertices of each hexagon ride on different dodecagon rails; the three vertices of each great triangle inscribed in the great hexagon occupy the same dodecagon Petrie polygon, four vertices apart, and they circulate on that isocline.[cj]
 In this orthogonal projection of the 24-point 24-cell to a {12/2}=2{6} dodecagram, each point represents two vertices, and each line represents multiple 24-cell edges. Each disjoint hexagon can be seen as a skew {12} dodecagon, a Petrie polygon of the 24-cell, by viewing it as two open skew hexagons with their opposite ends connected in a Möbius loop with a circumference of 4𝝅. The dodecagon projects to a single hexagon in two dimensions because it skews through all four dimensions. Those 2 disjoint skew dodecagons are the Clifford parallel circular vertex paths of the fibration's characteristic left (and right) isoclinic rotation.[ar] The 4 Clifford parallel great hexagons of the fibration are invariant planes of this rotation. The great hexagons rotate in incremental displacements of 30° like wheels and 30° orthogonally like coins flipping, displacing each vertex by 60°, as their vertices move along parallel helical isocline paths through successive Clifford parallel hexagon planes.[er] Alternatively, the 2 hexagons can be seen as 4 disjoint hexagons: 2 pairs of Clifford parallel great hexagons, so a fibration of 4 Clifford parallel great hexagon planes is represented.[r] This illustrates that the 2 dodecagon isoclines also correspond to a distinct fibration, in fact the same fibration as 4 great hexagons.
 At the mid-point of the isocline arc (30° away) it passes directly over the mid-point of a 24-cell edge.
 The isoclinic rotation in great hexagon invariant planes takes each vertex to a vertex one vertex away (60° = √1 away), without passing through any intervening vertices.[et] Each left hexagon rotates 30° (like a wheel) at the same time that it tilts sideways by 30° (in an orthogonal central plane) into its corresponding right hexagon plane. Repeated 12 times, this rotational displacement turns the 24-cell through 720° and returns it to its original orientation.
 The isoclinic rotation in great hexagon invariant planes takes each vertex through a 360° rotation and back to itself (360° = √0 away), without passing through any intervening vertices. Each left hexagon rotates 180° (like a wheel) at the same time that it tilts sideways by 180° (in an orthogonal central plane) into its corresponding right hexagon plane. Repeated 2 times, this rotational displacement turns the 24-cell through 720° and returns it to its original orientation.
 The isoclinic rotation in hexagon invariant planes takes each vertex to a vertex three vertices away (180° = √4 away),[ej] without passing through any intervening vertices. Each left hexagon rotates 90° (like a wheel) at the same time that it tilts sideways by 90° (in an orthogonal central plane) into its corresponding right hexagon plane. Repeated 4 times, this rotational displacement turns the 24-cell through 720° and returns it to its original orientation.
 The edges and 4𝝅 characteristic rotations of the 16-cell lie in the great square central planes. Rotations of this type are an expression of theB4 symmetry group. The edges and 4𝝅 characteristic rotations of the 24-cell lie in the great hexagon (great triangle) central planes. Rotations of this type are an expression of the F4 symmetry group.
 Two great circle polygons either intersect in a common axis, or they are Clifford parallel (isoclinic) and share no vertices.[au] Three great squares and four great hexagons intersect at each 24-cell vertex. Each great hexagon intersects 9 distinct great squares, 3 in each of its 3 axes, and lies Clifford parallel to the other 9 great squares. Each great square intersects 8 distinct great hexagons, 4 in each of its 2 axes, and lies Clifford parallel to the other 8 great hexagons.
 This hybrid isoclinic rotation carries the two kinds of central planes to each other: great square planes characteristic of the 16-cell and great hexagon (great triangle) planes characteristic of the 24-cell.[ex] This is possible because some great hexagon planes lie Clifford parallel to some great square planes.[ey]
 The isoclinic rotation in great hexagon invariant planes takes each vertex to a vertex one vertex away (60° = √1 away), without passing through any intervening vertices. Each left hexagon rotates 30° (like a wheel) at the same time that it tilts sideways by 30° (in an orthogonal central plane) into its corresponding right square plane.[ez] Repeated 12 times, this rotational displacement turns the 24-cell through 720° and returns it to its original orientation.
 The 24-cell has 18 great squares, in 3 disjoint sets of 6 mutually orthogonal great squares comprising a 16-cell.[x] Within each 16-cell are 3 sets of 2 completely orthogonal great squares, so each great square is disjoint not only from all the great squares in the other two 16-cells, but also from one other great square in the same 16-cell. Each great square is disjoint from 13 others, and shares two vertices (an axis) with 4 others (in the same 16-cell).
 Because in the 24-cell each great square is completely orthogonal to another great square, the quaternion groups (for example) correspond to the same set of great square planes. That distinct set of 6 disjoint great squares has two names, used in the left (or right) rotational context, because it constitutes both a left and a right fibration of great squares.
 The isoclinic rotation in hexagon invariant planes takes each vertex to a vertex two vertices away (120° = √3 away), without passing through any intervening vertices. Each left hexagon rotates 60° (like a wheel) at the same time that it tilts sideways by 60° (in an orthogonal central plane) into its corresponding right square plane.[ez] Repeated 6 times, this rotational displacement turns the 24-cell through 720° and returns it to its original orientation.
 The isoclinic rotation in great square invariant planes takes each vertex through a 360° rotation and back to itself (360° = √0 away), without passing through any intervening vertices. Each left square rotates 180° (like a wheel) at the same time that it tilts sideways by 180° (in an orthogonal central plane) into its corresponding right square plane. Repeated 2 times, this rotational displacement turns the 24-cell through 720° and returns it to its original orientation.
 A quaternion Cartesian coordinate designates a vertex joined to a top vertex by one instance of a distinct chord. The conventional top vertex of a unit radius 4-polytope in cell-first orientation is  designates a √2 chord of 90° arc-length. Each such distinct chord is an edge of a distinct great circle polygon, in this example a great square, intersecting the top vertex. Great circle polygons occur in sets of Clifford parallel central planes, each set of disjoint great circles comprising a discrete Hopf fibration that intersects every vertex just once. One great circle polygon in each set intersects the top vertex. This quaternion coordinate is thus representative of the 6 disjoint great squares pictured, a quaternion group[ej] which comprise one distinct fibration of the [18] great squares (three fibrations of great squares) that occur in the 24-cell.[j]
 The representative coordinate  is not a vertex of the unit-radius 24-cell in standard (vertex-up) orientation, it is the center of an octahedral cell. Some of the 24-cell's lines of symmetry (Coxeter's "reflecting circles") run through cell centers rather than through vertices, and quaternion group q6 corresponds to a set of those. However, q6 also corresponds to the set of great squares pictured, which lie orthogonal to those cells (completely disjoint from the cell).[ff]
 The isoclinic rotation in great square invariant planes takes each vertex to a vertex 180° = √4 away,[ej] without passing through any intervening vertices. Each left square rotates 90° (like a wheel) at the same time that it tilts sideways by 90° (in an orthogonal central plane) into its corresponding right square, which in this rotation is the completely orthogonal plane. Repeated 4 times, this rotational displacement turns the 24-cell through 720° and returns it to its original orientation.
 In this orthogonal projection of the 24-point 24-cell to a {12/3}=3{4} dodecagram, each point represents two vertices, and each line represents multiple √2 chords. Each disjoint square can be seen as a skew {8/3} octagram with √2 edges: two open skew squares with their opposite ends connected in a Möbius loop with a circumference of 4𝝅, visible in the {24/9}=3{8/3} orthogonal projection. The octagram projects to a single square in two dimensions because it skews through all four dimensions. Those 3 disjoint skew octagram isoclines are the circular vertex paths characteristic of an isoclinic rotation in great square planes, in which the 6 Clifford parallel great squares are invariant rotation planes. The great squares rotate 90° like wheels and 90° orthogonally like coins flipping, displacing each vertex by 180°, so each vertex exchanges places with its antipodal vertex. Each octagram isocline circles through the 8 vertices of a disjoint 16-cell. Alternatively, the 3 squares can be seen as a fibration of 6 Clifford parallel squares.[j] This illustrates that the 3 octagram isoclines also correspond to a distinct fibration, in fact the same fibration as 6 squares.
 At the mid-point of the isocline arc (45° away) it passes directly over the mid-point of a 24-cell edge.
 The isoclinic rotation in great square invariant planes takes each vertex to a vertex 90° = √2 away, without passing through any intervening vertices.[fj] Each left square rotates 45° (like a wheel) at the same time that it tilts sideways by 45° (in an orthogonal central plane) into its corresponding right square plane. Repeated 8 times, this rotational displacement turns the 24-cell through 720° and returns it to its original orientation.
 The  isoclinic rotation in great square invariant planes takes each vertex through a 360° rotation and back to itself (360° = √0 away), without passing through any intervening vertices. Each left square rotates 180° (like a wheel) at the same time that it tilts sideways by 180° (in an orthogonal central plane) into its corresponding right square plane. Repeated 2 times, this rotational displacement turns the 24-cell through 720° and returns it to its original orientation.
 The isoclinic rotation in great hexagon invariant planes takes each vertex to a vertex one vertex away (60° = √1 away), without passing through any intervening vertices. Each left square rotates 30° (like a wheel) at the same time that it tilts sideways by 30° (in an orthogonal central plane) into its corresponding right hexagon plane.[ez] Repeated 12 times, this rotational displacement turns the 24-cell through 720° and returns it to its original orientation.
 Theisoclinic rotation in great square invariant planes takes each vertex to a vertex 180° = √4 away,[ej] without passing through any intervening vertices. Each left square rotates 90° (like a wheel) at the same time that it tilts sideways by 90° (in an orthogonal central plane) into its corresponding right square plane, which in this rotation is the completely orthogonal plane. Repeated 4 times, this rotational displacement turns the 24-cell through 720° and returns it to its original orientation.
 At the mid-point of the isocline arc (45° away) it passes directly over the mid-point of a 24-cell edge.
 Theisoclinic rotation in great digon invariant planes takes each vertex to a vertex 90° = √2 away, without passing through any intervening vertices.[fo] Each left digon rotates 45° (like a wheel) at the same time that it tilts sideways by 45° (in an orthogonal central plane) into its corresponding right digon plane. Repeated 8 times, this rotational displacement turns the 24-cell through 720° and returns it to its original orientation.
 The rotation is the identity operation of the 24-cell, in which no points move.
 The rotation is the central inversion of the 24-cell. This isoclinic rotation in great digon invariant planes takes each vertex to a vertex 180° = √4 away,[ej] without passing through any intervening vertices. Each left digon rotates 90° (like a wheel) at the same time that it tilts sideways by 90° (in an orthogonal central plane) into its corresponding right digon plane, which in this rotation is the completely orthogonal plane. Repeated 4 times, this rotational displacement turns the 24-cell through 720° and returns it to its original orientation.
 A right rotation is performed by rotating the left and right planes in the "same" direction, and a left rotation is performed by rotating left and right planes in "opposite" directions, according to the right hand rule by which we conventionally say which way is "up" on each of the 4 coordinate axes. Left and right rotations are chiral enantiomorphous shapes (like a pair of shoes), not opposite rotational directions. Both left and right rotations can be performed in either the positive or negative rotational direction (from left planes to right planes, or right planes to left planes), but that is an additional distinction.[cd]
